Good afternoon.
Welcome to
Advanced Performance Analysis with Shark.
I'm Eric Miller with the
Architecture Performance Group.
We're the authors of Shark.
We're here today because you
care about the efficiency of your
programs and their performance,
and we care about the
efficiency of your programs.
Most of you have probably
used Shark before,
maybe messed with the basic controls,
taken a time profile,
and reviewed the session and made some
optimizations in your applications.
Well, we're here today because Shark does
a lot more than simple time profiles.
We'll go over the windowed time facility,
which changes the way Shark collects
data with a circular buffer for samples.
And there are five other ways to actually
start and stop Shark besides using the
start button that we'll go over briefly.
Most of our talk will be devoted to two
other methods for examining performance
issues that are not time related.
And at the end,
we'll give you a sneak peak of Shark's
future and what that means for you.
So first, the window of time facility.
In the normal mode of using Shark,
you simply start Shark and let it run.
The buffer collects samples endlessly
until you stop Shark and examine the
samples that are collected in between.
And that's fine for probably 90% of the
time you'll use Shark and take samples.
But there are times when you don't know
exactly when you should start and stop.
And there are other times when
you just can't pin down a problem
because it's difficult to reproduce.
That's where the window of
time facility comes into play.
You simply start Shark in window of time
facility mode and let it run forever.
The sample window will
fill full of samples,
and as new samples come
in and fill the buffer,
the old samples are rejected.
This process will continue,
always having the latest
buffer of samples available,
until some time where something occurs
and you want to catch those samples,
or you reach a point in your
application where you want
to stop and take a session.
So, like I said,
you can profile indefinitely with
Window Time Facility because you'll
never run out of memory because
your sample buffer got too big.
It's fixed size.
You can use the Window Time Facility
with any of the trigger
methods that I mentioned.
and you can use the window time
facilities built into the time profile
and system trace configurations.
You can also change the size of the
sample window with configuration options.
Here you can see that there's
a 10,000 sample window by
default for time profile.
The system trace buffer
is a million events.
So keep window time facility in
mind when you're using Shark.
I'm going to talk about some
different ways to trigger Shark.
But first,
a brief word about the Start button.
It's right there on the front of Shark.
It's really easy to find and easy to use,
but you do actually have to
click the button to initiate
sampling and to stop sampling.
That means that the shortest
assumption you're going to be able to
collect is a couple of button clicks,
and most of that data
is going to be the UI.
So that leaves some accuracy behind,
but still that's fine
for most of your work.
But when you need to get more efficient,
that's when these other
trigger methods come in.
The first method is
the hotkey combination,
which is listed right
above the start key,
the start button rather, and by default,
the option Escape.
Now that's more accurate
than just pressing Start and
Stop because Shark can be in the
background of your Windows stack,
it can be iconified,
and you can still trigger sampling.
But you do, like the start button,
you do need to be logged into the
system in order to use this facility.
And if you happen to be using the
option escape key in your program,
or maybe you just want the hot key to
be on the other side of the keyboard,
you can configure it off of
Shark's Sampling Preference tab.
The next way that's more accurate
still is the Launch Panel in Shark.
And you can access that by setting
Shark's target menu to Process,
which makes a new menu that
the first entry will be Launch.
And when you select Launch,
you'll notice that the
Start button will gain an ellipsis.
That means when you actually press Start,
you'll get the Launch Panel,
where you can fill in
your executable path,
its working directory, shell variables,
and arguments you might need.
Then when you press OK,
Shark will immediately begin sampling
and then launch your application.
So you can sample the
startup of a program,
and you can also sample
any short-lived program.
Next is the unresponsive app trigger,
because we all know how much we
hate the spinning pizza of death.
So what you do here is you
put Shark in this mode and
Shark automatically begins sampling
when the spinning pizza comes on screen.
The session will then show you
which applications are where
while that pizza's on screen.
So because it's in
everything mode by default,
you can also filter on application names.
The only applications in the filter
list will be the ones Shark samples.
And of course,
you can set the minimum amount of time
that Shark should wait before it begins
sampling when the spinning pizza appears.
By default, it's a half second.
Now this is your most important
trigger method for this week.
That's the network iPhone triggering.
In this mode, once you select it,
Shark uses Bonjour to
discover new machines,
and you can use a Mac running
Shark in shared mode on your local
network and any iPhones that happen
to be tethered to your machine.
They show up in the list.
Once you connect to them,
pressing the Start button on the local
machine causes Shark in remote mode
to start sampling and stop sampling
on the iPod or on the network Mac.
Now, one of the differences here is
that sessions that are created
will be delivered right to your
local machine's desktop as opposed
to remaining on the other machine.
So not only do you want to use
this for your iPhone and your
iPod and for network Macs,
you can log into a Mac on the
network and collect samples
from a full-screen application.
And it's also really useful for
clusters of servers and single
servers where you don't have
access to the display directly.
And lastly is Remote Control.
It says Programmatic
Remote Control because the way you
use this is you actually have to add
code to your application to start
and stop Shark at your convenience.
So when you use those
methods in your code,
of course you have to link
with the Chud framework.
If that's not a possibility,
we also have a command line
utility called Chud Remote Control,
which has command line arguments
for starting and stopping
Shark to sample your application.
This is the most precise
way to control Shark.
Here's a simple programmatic
example that's included when
we ship Shark as an example.
We're going to instrument the
Towers of Hanoi solver every time
the Hanoi function is called.
So we slip a little code in.
And the first thing you want to do,
these are your five important lines
for using programmatic remote sampling.
Initialize the framework.
And called chat acquire remote access,
this ensures that Shark is ready for
profiling and essentially that means
that you've selected the sampling
programmatic remote in Shark.
Then right before the Hanoi function,
we'll call start remote perf monitor,
which takes a label.
That label string will be the title
of the session that Shark creates.
Then we run the function,
then we call stop remote perf monitor,
and every time we do
that through the loop,
we get a new session.
When you finish with remote profiling,
remember to call release remote access.
That way another program
can connect to Shark.
Here's a better example,
maybe more concrete,
that uses that window of time facility.
We did this with Final Cut Pro.
Put Shark in programmatic mode,
choose a config that has that
window time facility enabled,
and then add some code to your
program that'll stop profiling if you
find some kind of performance issue.
So you can see here we start
sampling before we enter a work loop.
And then in the work loop,
the only time we call stop
remote proof monitor is if
there's some kind of reason to.
If a slowdown is detected,
or in the case of Final Cut Pro,
a dropped frame,
this way you can let Shark run all night.
And at some point,
it may collect a session.
You come back in the morning,
and everything's good.
You have sessions.
Hopefully you don't have sessions,
but you need to drop your frames.
So I want to mention batch mode,
because batch mode isn't a trigger mode,
but it really enhances the
other modes by instead of having
sessions popping up on your screen,
the sessions are listed in
order as they're created.
This allows you to then choose
which of the sessions you want to
open instead of having a lasagna
of windows on your desktop from
dozens of sessions coming in.
And that will happen.
Lastly, I'd just like to mention the
command line version of Shark,
which is really quite similar to Shark,
except it adds a couple of text
file output reports and some
comma separate value reports
depending on the configuration.
You can use the same
hotkey as the application.
However, if you run the application
and the command line at the
same time on the same machine,
you can never be sure which of
the two will get the hotkey first.
So if you use Shark and you log into a
remote system with Command Line Shark,
you can use Control Backslash
to toggle sampling.
With Command Line Shark,
there are a host of command
line options to start sampling
and launch your application.
Command Line Shark can also attach to
your running application and sample that.
In network mode,
as I mentioned the iPhone network,
that was the control
system in the application.
In network mode, the command line is
always the shared version.
It's the other side, the client,
if you will.
And lastly,
if you're using the remote triggering
that I mentioned with the programmatic,
you can avoid using the chud calls
at all because the command line
version of Shark actually responds
to Unix signal SIG user 1 to start
Shark and SIG user 2 to stop Shark.
So after that brief run through,
I'd like to turn things over to Lance to
talk about a couple ways to use Shark.
Thank you, Eric.
So now that we know many ways to start
and stop Shark in different ways,
let's look at how we can use
Shark to move beyond the basic
time profiling of your CPU-bound
applications and go in and analyze
the performance of your multi-threaded
applications that with today's Macs
you inevitably will have to be doing.
So the first part of this,
we're going to go in and look
at a configuration in Shark that
you may not have used before,
which helps you track down the
idle time in your application and
figure out where it's coming from.
We call it time profiling
all thread states.
So, if you're here in this session,
we assume you've probably
used Shark before.
Otherwise, you might want to consider our
session in two days at the same time.
And hence,
you've probably seen this tabular browser
window pop up on your screen many times.
And, well, you know, this is great.
It summarizes what exactly the CPUs in
your program are doing in a very simple,
concise format.
And moreover, right up to the top,
just screaming, hey, optimize me,
look here,
are the things that are executing the
most in your application and telling you,
hey,
that's where you need to go optimize.
That's wonderful and all.
But unfortunately,
in today's multi-threaded applications,
it's not the only situation.
Instead,
our application performance can really
suffer because of what the CPUs are not
doing and when nothing is happening.
You know, it can be as simple as,
you know, blocked waiting for I.O.,
timers and things like that,
or even page faults.
But moreover, in your actual
multi-threaded applications,
it's more likely to be your threads
are synchronizing from one to another.
And they're waiting for locks, barriers,
and other synchronization
events to occur.
And unfortunately,
if you just take a time
profile of the whole system,
all you'll see is this idle
time pop up to the top.
And that really doesn't tell
you what you need to optimize.
Moreover, if you take a time
profile of your process,
you'd simply get no or few samples.
So therefore,
we're going to suggest that you
use Time Profile All Thread States,
which is a lot like Time Profile.
It does almost the exact same thing
in that it comes in and samples
your application very frequently,
or it can sample the entire
system if you prefer.
But unlike Time Profile,
which just simply records
what's happening on the CPU,
All Thread States records not
only the CPU-bound threads,
but also all those threads
that are just sitting around
waiting to run and records,
well, what they're not doing.
And so, you know,
a really simple example of how we could
use this is let's say your program is
running along and it completely deadlocks
and nothing appears to be happening.
If you would take a Time Profile of this,
well, you'd probably get no
samples or very few samples.
With a Time Profile All Thread States,
we can actually see and get samples
of what all these threads are
not doing and see where they are
deadlocked at and get a feeling for,
you know, how our program managed to get
all pretzeled up in this way.
And moreover,
you could also see if you have one thread
that's running out there all by itself
and the other threads aren't responding.
So, if you have one thread that's running
out there all by itself and the
other threads aren't responding,
you actually will get samples
from that thread being live.
So, this is nice as a debugging tool.
But let's see how we can use
this to performance analysis.
So, for that,
we'll give a little simple example here.
Let's say we have this
small loop in our program,
which happens to be a
very important loop.
And we want to make our
program thread safe.
And the simplest way to make
serial code thread safe is,
well,
let's just slap a lock around it and say,
okay, only one thread at a
time going through here.
And this is often actually sufficient.
So, let's say we have enough
of these locks and they're
covering small enough regions.
But what you might find is
if you put some of this in,
you try to measure your performance and,
well,
it doesn't seem to be improving at all.
So, what can we do?
Well, if you just simply use
a time profile on this,
well, you'll get this hot spot
in the middle of the loop.
That's pretty much what you'd expect.
You know, that's the code that's
executing the most.
It's doing a lot of floating
point math and the like.
But unfortunately,
it's not really telling you what your
performance problem is coming from.
For that, instead,
you need to know that the
real problem is all the time.
So, let's say we have a lot of time.
Well,
that's pretty much what you'd expect.
You know, that's the code that's
executing the most.
All the threads getting piled up
on this lock at the entry point,
trying to get in here and just
wasting their time waiting.
And to know this, you need to use a time
profile on thread states.
Well, you know, heck,
you could have probably just
taken a time profile and gone,
well, yeah,
that's the hotspot in my program.
You know,
the lock right in front of it is going
to be where everything is waiting.
I can kind of figure
that out by inspection.
Well, you know,
that works on an example that's trivial.
But in a real program, of course,
this is only going to be
one little spot in your big,
huge program.
And instead,
you're going to have a lot of other
blocking points scattered around as well.
And, well, you know,
those might not have any correlation
whatsoever with the hotspots
identified by the time profile.
But all thread states let
you go and identify all
these other hotspots as well.
So, hey, this sounds wonderful.
This shows both the
hotspots we're executing,
where we're not executing.
Hey, Ash, forget time profile.
Let's just use this.
That's not always the best idea either,
because there are a couple caveats here.
First off, if you think about it,
we're recording the state of
all the threads in your system,
whether they're running or not.
So there is inevitably higher overhead
associated with taking each sample.
And if you're taking a
high enough sampling rate,
this therefore can cause Shark to
actually eat up a fair number of
CPU cycles and may have some impact
on the performance of your program.
So that might not always be desirable.
But the more important part is that
unlike with the basic time profile
where all this important stuff
comes right up to the top and says,
hey, optimize me, well,
with all thread states, unfortunately,
that doesn't always happen.
Because we're actually
sampling from all the threads,
whether they're blocked or not.
And, well,
there's usually a bunch of blocked
threads in Mac OS X processes that are,
you know, just sitting around
minding their own business,
and they're supposed to
be sitting there blocked.
You know,
typically things like waiting for
UI events to occur and the like.
And, frankly, you know,
you could care less about those.
[Transcript missing]
So let's give you an example of the
kind of thinking process you'll have to
use whenever you're trying to parse one
of these all-threaded state displays.
So up here on screen,
we've got a simple little
example of how you might have
a multi-threaded application.
And then we've got a master thread,
which is running along and forking off
work to a variety of worker threads.
So if we look at how this
executes over the course of time,
what's going to happen is the master
thread will execute for a while.
And then when it reaches a point where
it can fork off some parallel work,
it will, at the start line barrier where
all the workers are waiting,
it'll say, hey, everyone, go.
They'll go and start executing in
parallel for a while until they
finish their parallel region.
And then they'll all pile up at
this finish line barrier until all
of them are done with their work.
And then they'll let the master
start up its serial execution again.
This is a really simple and common
parallel programming paradigm.
How can we optimize this?
First off,
you'll definitely want to go in
and optimize all this active time
that you see up here in blue.
Just the stuff that time
profile was telling you to
do in multi-threaded domain,
that's still very important.
You still want to go in and optimize it,
no question about it.
But with the block time here,
it's important,
but it's not quite as straightforward.
So, for example,
the time that workers are spent
waiting at the finish line barrier,
this is caused by load
imbalance among threads,
some of them finishing too early.
And frankly,
by waiting around for some parallel
threads longer than others,
we're actually wasting our time.
If we could take some of the work being
done by that third longer thread and
move it over to one of the fast ones,
we could actually reach that finish line
barrier sooner with all four threads.
So we really want to minimize
this to reduce load imbalance.
points.
Secondly,
we have the time that the workers
spend at their start line barrier,
just simply waiting for
work to be given to them.
Well, you know,
we do want to minimize this, but,
you know, frankly,
the information we're getting here from
Shark is maybe not as useful because,
really, it's pretty redundant.
It's just simply the same time
that the master spend is working,
you know, multiplied by four here.
So it's nice,
but it's not really any new information.
And then we had the time that the
master spends waiting and blocked.
And frankly, who cares about this?
It doesn't make any difference.
We want the parallel workers to
be working as much as possible.
We want the master to be
sitting around waiting for them.
So, you know, you can ignore this.
Going back and looking
at our original code,
therefore, well,
these hotspots will appear when we
do a time profile all thread states,
but we don't actually
care about all of them.
If we go in and think about
the analysis we just did and
apply it to what we see here,
you can actually realize
that these top two hotspots,
poof, we can just ignore those altogether
because those are things which
we really don't care about.
Instead,
we care about the time that the workers
are actually working and about the
time that they're waiting at the finish
line barrier caused by load imbalance.
And those are what's
really important for us.
Okay, so now that I've kind of given
you a view as to what time
profile threat states can do,
let's make this a little more concrete.
So last year in our session,
we demonstrated how we took
the reference code from the
internet for the MPEG-2 decoder.
And just doing serial optimizations,
we were able to speed it up by about 6x.
Pretty decent.
But we were only using one core,
and today's Macs have
several cores to use.
So unfortunately we
found going beyond that,
the parallelizing was either
easy or pretty hard depending on
which loops we were looking at.
We found that the pixel operations,
which we took entire frames of pixels and
did operations over the entire frames,
those were pretty easy to parallelize.
And that we can just
simply take the frames and,
you know, pass them out,
pass out chunks into the cores and use a
synchronization routine just like you saw
in a couple of slides back with barriers
at the beginning and end of each frame.
Unfortunately,
the actual decoding loops were much
harder because we had in between
the actual decoding operations,
we're actually accessing the
movie file itself on disk.
And that's a serial operation
because we're reading variable length
chunks for each bit of picture.
So, you know, we wondered, well,
do we really have to do this?
That looks like a lot of work.
Let's see if we can just simply
do the easy parallelization
and leave it at that.
[Transcript missing]
So this is an eight core machine
and I want to... One thing,
if you want to use the
processor pref pane,
we get a lot of requests for this.
It's actually buried nowadays off in
developer extras preference panes.
It's not actually installed by
default when you install Shark.
So this is a really good trick to
know if you want to actually play
with different numbers of processors.
On the same computer and
see how the number of cores
actually affects your work.
I'm going to look at this
right now with just four cores,
just to see how this goes.
So first off,
if we go back to look at our decoder,
well, it started out,
this is running about real time with
these seals swimming around in circles.
And so, you know, I think, well,
that's not too bad.
But this is, of course,
using an entire processor on
a high-end Mac Pro machine.
So, you know,
we really will typically want to
just use a very small amount of
processors so we can do multiple,
we can do like high-definition video,
because this is just a
standard definition video,
or we can do multiple streams at once,
or, hey,
we can do other things like shutting down
the processor and letting it save power.
So we first took this and, like I said,
last year we managed to speed
it up pretty well just by
doing serial optimizations.
So now these, just by working with
serial optimizations,
we're able to get these seals
going considerably faster,
now to about 144,
140-ish frames a second.
Pretty good.
But we wondered, can we make that,
can we do better with multiple cores?
So, let me change this to use four cores
and just doing the easy optimizations.
Let's try this out.
Well, it's definitely faster,
but that's not very much faster.
That's only about 10
frames per second faster.
So let's use Shark to
go and analyze this.
So first I'll switch from time profile
to time profile all thread states.
And I'm going to look at
my MPEG-2 decode process.
So I'll start that out.
And let these guys do a couple laps.
And then I'll use the hotkey
that Eric was discussing
to go ahead and quit that.
And clear this out of the way
to let Shark analyze faster.
So what we're going to see here in
a moment is a browser display that
looks much like you just saw from any
normal time profile that you might do.
And it looks pretty familiar here.
The one big difference is that
you can see up here at the top,
are several symbols that you
may not be familiar with.
A lot of semaphore stuff and so on.
And what these are from are symbols
from anything which is blocked,
threads that are blocked.
And you can see when we look
down here at all the threads,
where on a time profile,
we'd see a couple of decoding threads,
here we have a lot of
threads all piled up.
'Cause a lot of these threads were just
simply sitting around doing nothing.
But we took samples from them.
And as you can see here,
most all the threads had the
same number of samples because we
were taking a sample from every
single thread every single time.
And this is sort of a hallmark of
a time profile all threads stays.
Except you see this one guy down here,
well, that was a thread that was
actually created or destroyed
while we were sampling.
And hence it doesn't have
the same number of samples.
So going in and looking at these,
we can pop some of these open,
and if you dig down a few
levels through this list,
well, eventually we reach a point where,
well, let's see, this looks, oh, man,
that's like some UI garbage or something.
I don't really want to know about that.
You can keep digging through here.
This can take a while.
So what I really recommend you do is if
you hold down the Option key at any time,
either with all thread states or
with a time profile one as well,
you click, boom,
these are just all open at once,
sometimes giving you more
information than you really want.
But it makes it,
when you're digging through
these really deep stacks,
it makes it a lot easier.
And we can just see at
a quick glance here,
that's from a bunch of, like,
UI threads and so on.
So I really don't care about that either.
And really, we have to dig down through
a few of these before,
oh, okay,
now we're getting into weight points
that our code actually called.
And in fact, we can see these are various
points in our program.
And to kind of try to
reduce the clutter somewhat,
I'm going to go in and look
at one of the various worker
threads that I use to actually
do parallel work in this program.
And we can now see at a glance that,
well,
these worker threads are spending 88%
of the time just waiting for work to do.
Hmm.
Well, let's see, why are they waiting?
If I pop this open,
We can now -- I've actually labeled
the routines here so you can see
here's the start line barrier and
here's the finish line barrier.
So the finish line barrier,
we're having a couple percent there.
That's, you know, that's not zero,
but it's not horrible either.
Most of our time, unfortunately,
is here at the start line barrier.
We're waiting there
ridiculous amounts of time.
So unfortunately what we're seeing here
is that we probably just can't get away
with doing those easy parallelizations.
This is really dropping way
too much time on the floor.
Also I'll point out that when your
symbol names don't tell you this
really clearly right off the bat,
you can go -- if you have, say,
multiple synchronization
points in a single function,
you can just double click on these just
like you can with time profile and it
will toss you into the source code.
As you see here,
I kind of just tossed randomly about
and there aren't any highlights.
That's because only the sort
self column is highlighted.
So I'm going to go over here and
show the advanced settings drawer.
You want to make sure you have this
-- you want to make sure you have this
show total column checkbox clicked.
Now we added the total column.
And if we move around,
now we can actually see the
synchronization points where we were
calling into routines and blocking.
And they've now been highlighted
so we can see exactly where
those were and where we were
spending all our time waiting.
Okay, so going back to the slides,
what we learned here was
that we're probably going to
need to do some more work.
So, well, you know,
we'll look at that more in a little bit.
But for now, I want to look at trying to
simplify down some of that clutter.
You saw with just that little
session looking at this,
well, fairly simple example application,
there was a whole lot of clutter
to dig through in that display
because there was a lot of blocking
calls in any real application.
And if you have, you know,
a full large-scale application,
it can be just a nightmare
to dig through it.
So, to try to dig through some of that,
we're going to use options we call data
mining in Shark to actually go and look
just at what you're interested in by
doing things like hiding symbols or,
in fact, entire libraries.
which are not of interest
to us at any point in time.
[Transcript missing]
So just to give you a little reminder
of what Shark is doing under the covers,
what it's actually doing is
recording call stacks over
time at each sample point.
And it then goes and takes these
call stacks and processes them,
starting from the root,
going up to the top,
and building up a tree of what
all functions are being called
and who's calling each other.
These trees are then what's used
to display the browsers and get
the various trees you see there.
Moreover, you may have noticed the total
and self columns in your browser.
Well,
these are actually done by the-- Shark is
doing accounting under the covers as
it's counting up all these functions.
And what we have here is self is
the actual number of samples that
fall within a particular function.
While total is the number of samples
that fall either within that function,
the self samples,
or in any of the functions
that it calls underneath.
So with this kind of understanding,
keep an eye on this and you'll
see how this changes as we
data mine in different ways.
So first, and probably foremost,
it's one of the first things
I almost always do here when
looking at a complicated
Shark session is charging libraries.
So, for example, up here in this tree,
we have some code from, like,
system libraries provided by Apple.
And that's code you can't actually
touch and modify yourself.
So, you know,
you'd really rather just not
worry about the fact that the
samples fell deep in there.
You're instead worried about your
own code that you can actually change
that's calling into these libraries.
So let's try to get rid of some of those.
What we can do is we can charge
the lib system calls under here,
get rid of them.
But since we do want to know which
of our functions we're spending
time calling into those libraries,
because we may want to
optimize those functions,
we can have Shark take all those
samples and coalesce them up into your
functions that are making the calls.
So we can still see that
those functions are important.
And they may, in fact,
then pop up to the top
of the list and say,
hey, look at me,
I'm the most important part here.
And as you can see here,
what we have is that
up in the baz function,
after we've done this coalescing,
all the samples that have been brought
up from below are actually mixed in
with the ones that are already there.
So now the self number
in baz is pretty high.
Well, in fact, you may not actually
want that at all times.
What you may want is something
a little less aggressive.
And so for that, you might want to do
flattening of your libraries.
So in this case, like, let's say,
you know, we don't really care about
all the guts of the library,
but we do want to know what samples we're
having that are calling lock and unlock.
So let's simplify by getting
everything below the lock and unlock,
but keeping the actual calls themselves
so we know when we're making calls.
So now we just take those
samples and we bring them up
into the first level of callers.
and Chris Higgins will be joining
us for a sneak peak at how Shark is
evolving for future releases.
Another thing you might
want to do is say,
you know, I don't want to worry about
this portion of my trace
profile at this point in time.
I want to focus in on
this part over here.
Well, let's just simply remove it.
Like, let's say we don't care about
the bar function at all.
Let's just get rid of that because
I want to focus in on what's happening
over at the other side of the tree.
And so we can just
simply cross those out,
nuke them entirely.
And what will happen here is that unlike
the previous flattening and so on,
where we're coalescing samples,
we're going to take the totals and drop
them down because these three samples
are now removed from the profile,
at least from the view you're
currently getting with data mining.
Well, okay, that works pretty well,
but what if instead of trying to
knock out one symbol at a time,
we instead want to go in and
look at one particular symbol?
Let's say bar is actually what we decided
was really the most important thing.
Let's go in and focus on that.
And once we focus in on bar, well,
then all the other
samples will disappear.
And we'll drop the totals for the
remaining callers down appropriately.
We remove those four samples.
And one thing I really want to
point out here is that all the
self samples from Baz are gone.
All the self samples didn't
actually involve bar.
So hence,
since bar is not in the call stack,
those are removed.
Okay, that's pretty good.
But what focusing actually does more
than just simply removing samples.
It also takes the tree and hides
the part of it above your symbol.
So all that stuff like start
and main and whatnot that's
all at the root of the tree,
you know, frankly,
if you're focusing on that symbol,
you probably don't care
so much about those.
You want to know about your
symbol and everything below it
and what it's actually calling.
Or at other times, you might want to know
how it's being reached,
what's going on.
So if you do actually want to know
about all that start and main and so on,
well, you can do focus callers instead.
And that will go in and show you just
the paths down to your function while
leaving out everything below it.
Okay, that's all pretty good.
Well, but in a real application,
just doing one or two of
these options probably won't
simplify things down enough.
So really, you're going to want to mix
and match a lot of them.
And Shark's able to do that.
It can go and apply many of
these operations serially,
one after another,
as you've selected them.
And so, for example,
let's say we want to focus in on foo.
That's our area of most interest.
So that chops out part of the tree.
But, you know,
we also don't care about the stuff
inside the lib system as well.
So let's go ahead and
flatten that out as well.
And now by applying these
two operations at once,
we've now taken our big tree there
and simplified it down to just a small
section that we can really focus our
attention in on and figure out how
to optimize that part of the program.
Well, okay, so this is a lot of stuff.
You know,
how can we actually control all this?
Well, there's a data mining menu that you
may have seen up in the menu bar,
potentially ignored.
And all these commands are
just simply up in that menu.
You just need to select your
symbol in the browser display
and go up and choose the menu.
Or if you have a two-button
mouse or a control click,
you can pull up a contextual menu
on any symbol in the profile browser
displays and choose to go in and
do any of these options on that
particular symbol our library.
But, hey, there's more as well.
So if you go over here to
the Advanced Settings drawer,
you'll notice that whenever
you have any view in Shark,
some sort of profile browser from
many different configurations
where data mining can occur,
well, this pane over here will actually
appear so that you can use it.
And it actually provides
a lot of useful controls.
First off, there's just the on/off
control at the very top.
It's really great to just simply
flick that on and off to kind of see
a quick before and after comparison
because when you flick it off,
it won't forget the sequence
of data mining options.
So you can actually
just go back and forth.
Also, there are several preset
really useful techniques.
Charging and flattening system libraries,
like I mentioned,
are just right there so you
can get them at a click.
and I will be joined by Eric Miller,
Lance Hammond, Rick Altherr,
Rick Altherr,
and I will be joined by Eric Miller.
Also, you can say, okay, well,
kernel samples, well,
I can't change the kernel unless
I work at Apple all of a sudden.
So just forget those and I'll go and
worry about those at another time.
There are also a couple unique features
that are only available through
the Advanced Settings drawer here.
One is you can flatten recursion.
So if you have a really long list
of recursive functions that when
you go to the profile browser
and you do that option click,
they just zip down forever.
Well, you can just simply click
on Flatten Recursion,
and Shark will notice that, hey,
that's the same function
being called over and over,
and it'll flatten that stack
down to the first entry.
Also, you can tell Shark to knock
out any lightweight symbols,
and you can actually select the
number of samples that you want
to allow as the cutoff point in
order to get rid of symbols where
you only have a couple of samples,
so it's really not that important.
It may even be
statistically insignificant.
Okay, now going back to our demo.
Okay, so we went in and based on
the information we saw before,
we went, well, okay,
we've got to bite the bullet.
We need to parallelize that decode.
And so we went in and found the
picture slice loop in it and
went in and parallelized on that.
In order to do that,
we had to go and find all of the
reading of the file and concentrate
that all at the beginning of the slice
in order to prevent that serial code
from preventing parallel execution.
That was a fair amount of work,
but ultimately, it did seem to work out.
But we were really concerned that because
different slices of the picture will be
of different portions of the picture,
and hence maybe showing different items,
and so some things may require more
or less encoding depending on how
complicated the picture is there.
We were worried about load imbalance
between these different slices.
So we actually made two
slightly different versions.
The sequenced version takes the slices
of the pictures and assigns them to
threads in our parallel loop in order.
In the order that they
were in the original file,
they get assigned to our threads, 1, 2,
3, 4.
And this allows very
simple synchronization.
It's kind of the best analogy as to
like relay runners at the Olympics.
You know, they take the baton,
they read their portion of the file,
and they pass the baton off to the next.
And then they go off and do
their parallel decoding work.
And the threads just keep
passing the baton as they
need to do their file access.
simple enough.
We also wanted to look
at the unordered case.
As soon as the thread finishes up with
reading its portion of the file it says,
hey, whoever is free,
come in and go ahead and
grab the next slice here.
It's ready for you to go.
And this should in theory tolerate
load imbalance better because if we
have a slice which is really short,
that thread can zip through its
short slice and then be free and
immediately go and grab a new thread.
So we wondered which is better and also
a little bit about why once we saw that.
So going back over here
to the demo machine.
Here we have our application again,
and we went and did
the all parallel case.
And here's the unordered case.
So we can see it play it.
And now those seals are zipping
around considerably faster.
They've gone from about 150
frames per second up to about
300 by going with four threads.
2x performance increase of four threads.
That's actually not bad if you
look at a lot of parallel programs.
But let's see if we can figure
out a little bit more about why.
So let's use our hot key
again and start sampling.
Do do do do do do,
it's on a new lap or two.
And now what we're going to do is
go through and we will be analyzing
to see why how the parallel decode
loop was affecting our performance.
So the browser here looks a lot like what
we just saw before with a lot of these,
you know, kind of strange blocking
calls up at the top.
And again,
we could go in and click on them and go,
well, let's see,
that's a whole bunch of UI stuff.
No, I don't really care about that.
But let's do something about it.
Let's use some data mining to
try to clear out this clutter.
So the first thing I like to do is
get rid of the system libraries.
You can charge them in some cases,
but I do actually care about, you know,
when I'm in the various
locking and waiting calls,
I do want to know that that's blocking,
not running.
I'm just going to flatten
those libraries instead.
And now you'll see that the
view changes a little bit here.
The speech ball comes up as
Shark thinks a bit about what
all these system libraries are.
And now you can see that instead
of the name of library routine
is deep inside the libraries,
we're instead seeing a lot of
the data that we're getting
from the system libraries.
And so we're going to go ahead
and do a little bit of a search.
And we're going to go
ahead and do a search.
And we're going to go ahead and
do a little bit of a search.
And we're going to go
ahead and do a search.
And we're going to go ahead and
do a little bit of a search.
And we're going to go ahead and do
a names of routines which were the
ones that we were actually calling,
pthread_con_wait,
select pthread_con_timed_wait
and the like.
We can now dig into these.
And well, we're still seeing that -- hmm,
yeah, that's like UI stuff, okay.
Well, I'm going to go and just simply
tell Shrk to remove that symbol.
It's clearly stuff I don't care about.
Pop this down.
That's a bunch of UI stuff, too.
Okay.
And then if I hold down the
control key here or right click,
we can go in and say remove that as well.
[Transcript missing]
and with this you can actually
see the sequence of operations
and maybe take notes for later on.
Okay,
there's also a restore button down here
if you want to get rid of all those.
Okay, well, we can continue the,
you know,
removing symbols here for a while.
But I happen to know, you know,
I'm really interested
in that parallel decode,
and I really don't care
about anything else.
So I'd rather go in and
focus in on parallel decode.
Well, first of all, to find it.
Finding it is usually,
for a high-level function like this,
is usually easier if
I switch to the tree view.
So now I'm starting at
the top and working down.
And indeed, if I go at thread start here,
parallel worker shell, parallel worker,
aha, there's parallel decode
just a few levels down.
So I'm going to go and right click on
this and do focus in on parallel decode.
Okay,
so now everything above parallel decode,
as I said,
is chopped off and thrown away.
And we're just looking at it
from parallel decode on down.
So let's see, I'm going to go in.
This is to actually see
where we're spending time.
I'm going to flip back to heavy view.
And now we can see,
that, well,
we're spending our -- wherever
we're in parallel decoding,
we're spending about 27%
of the time waiting here,
about 1% in locking, and most of the rest
we're actually executing.
And, frankly, this is not too bad.
There's a little bit of
spin locks and so on.
So we're getting something
like 30% of the time waiting.
And it would be interesting
to compare that against what
we can do in the ordered case.
So I'll do Let's do a quick session here.
That's pretty similar.
Maybe not quite as fast.
Maybe a few frames per second slower,
but it's in the same ballpark.
So I'm going to start that.
We'll get another session here,
which should look pretty much the same.
And now also, I can see just what I've
been doing here before.
So I'm going to apply the same
operations really quickly.
So here I've got Flattened
System Libraries.
It's already been checked for
me now that Shark has seen
that that's what I like to do.
And so I'm going to go in and
just flip over to Tree View and
go to pop this guy open.
There's Parallel Decode.
I'll go in and focus on that.
and flip back over again.
And we can see here that, well, you know,
these are actually looking a lot alike.
What we see with the sequence
case is we're getting just a few
percent more time spent waiting.
You know,
it's only a few frames per second,
but it is noticeable.
So that's kind of an interesting finding.
And we were able to find that
and narrow it down and isolate
it exactly for that loop,
just with a few quick
data mining options here.
Instead of having this buried in among
all sorts of data from all of our
various loops and operations throughout.
So what did we learn?
Going back to slides,
what we've learned really
is that with data mining,
instead of having to dig through
all this information painfully,
routine by routine,
we were able to go in and have
Shark isolate this parallel
decode function really easily.
So we could precisely examine just that
loop while excluding everything else.
And also what we saw looking
at the application is unordered
is a bit faster on four cores.
Almost the same, just a bit faster.
So, you know,
it kind of leads us to think, well,
maybe load imbalance
is the bigger problem.
But to actually figure out
exactly why that's the case,
we're going to need a new tool.
Because while time profile on all thread
states is great for going in and finding
which blocking operations are important,
and it's great because you can go in and
you can lower the sample rate and sample
over large portions of your application
and get a real overview as to where your
application is working and synchronizing,
it can't really give you enough
information to go in and debug
individual locking and blocking
operations in your code.
You often need to know how and why
the synchronization and serialization
is occurring between your threads,
and so you need to see the time
sequencing of how these threads are
passing off from one thread to another.
And for that, we need another tool,
System Trace,
which allows you to see the system and
threading interaction very precisely.
So what a system trace is,
it's an exact trace of all the
OS entry points in your program.
And this includes all the blocking,
because whenever your threads block,
they go into the kernel.
So instead of with the time
profile view where we get these
evenly spaced samples throughout,
system trace will instead record data
whenever we go in and out of the kernel.
So like this very first
entry point into the kernel,
this small red square on the left,
we'll actually see that instead
of having it fall between samples.
This is a lot better than, say,
taking your time profile and cranking
up the sample rate really high.
We've encountered several
developers who've cranked the
sample rate to 20 microseconds,
which,
while you can see a lot of information,
it really blows through
memory really fast,
and you can't actually
take very long sessions.
And it gives you a whole lot of data,
which is hard to dig through.
System Price gives you this a lot more
efficiently and presents it a lot better.
So you can go in and you can
examine these multi-threaded
applications really in close behavior.
So you can see all the lock
contention events that occur.
Anytime a lock is contended,
it'll pop up.
If a lock doesn't have contention,
it actually won't be
visible on a system trace,
because in Mac OS X,
you don't go into the kernel if
there's no contention for a lock,
only if there's actually contention.
But just with this,
we can go in and see how our
semaphores are communicating
and how threads are waiting and
releasing and blocking and blocking.
And see the patterns of
how we're communicating.
Back and forth from one thread to another
and running from one thread to another.
You can also see some other things here,
too.
How your thread is going in
and interacting with Mac OS X.
System calls, page faults, and so on.
And moreover, just like time profile or
time profile thread states,
you don't have to use any
modifications to your source code
in order to use system trace.
You can just simply run it out
of the box and users can use it.
But if you like,
you can actually go in and put tweaks.
And you can use the tweaks in
your code to do things like
starting and stopping shark with
the programmatic remote control.
That still works.
Okay, well,
once you've actually used System Trace,
what will pop up is there are
several views that are possible.
But in general,
for really detailed analysis,
I usually prefer to use the
timeline view shown here,
which shows the threads executing over
the course of time and allows you to
actually go in and click on the various
events and examine them in detail.
If you're interested in learning
more about the other displays,
I recommend you come to our introductory
session on Thursday because the second
half of that talk is going to go in
and give you a very detailed tour
of all the aspects of System Trace.
But given the limited time we have today,
I'm going to go in and focus
in on just a few elements.
So in particular,
the events are of most interest to me.
So various system call events are
indicated by these little telephones,
and we can see both non-blocking system
calls and blocking system calls when we
bridge between two thread-run intervals.
Most importantly for any
multi-threaded program,
you're going to want to
probably note the locks,
which show up as these little lock
icons and indicate that you're
doing various multi-threaded
operations and you're actually
locking and having lock contention.
You can also see virtual memory events.
Page faults appear here.
Most significantly,
these are usually page in and out
operations where you have to actually
go and wait for the disk to occur.
But in modern
multi-threaded applications,
a lot of these other faults can
actually come up in places where
you might not think about them.
Because oftentimes the OS communicates
between different threads by
actually page faulting data and
moving entire pages from one
thread's address space to another.
So you can get actually sequences
of these faults when you're doing a
lot of inter-process communication.
Also,
Leopard has added a couple new faults,
guard and failed,
which indicate when we're actually
having problems in our program
and we're simply not fail,
VM events are simply not
working for some reason,
such as, say, a segmentation fault.
You can also see things like interrupts,
any hardware interrupts that come
in from things like IO operations,
complete DMAs,
timer interrupts and the like.
And if you like,
you can actually go in and add events to
your code using what we call signposts.
These come in two big varieties.
First are the point signposts,
which just simply say, "Hey,
here's where I am.
Look here." So that way,
if you have any area in your code
which doesn't normally do system calls,
you can actually have a record of
that on the system trace showing,
"Here's where I am.
Here's where I am.
Here's where I am."
Also,
if you want to measure sequences of time,
you can use interval signposts, which,
just like the system calls,
have a beginning and end
with a little underbar.
With each signpost,
you can record up to four
integer auxiliary values,
which can then be displayed in
Shark when you click on the event.
And you can pretty much put
these in anywhere you want,
but keeping in mind that there
is some time penalty involved.
If you put it in user code,
it's about 20 to 50
microseconds or so per signpost.
So you have to be a little
careful about these.
In the kernel,
where you can put them in KEXT as
well if you're a KEXT developer,
the overhead is pretty insignificant
because you're already in the kernel,
but there is a little bit.
So you can't just put
a bazillion of them in.
How can we use this?
Let's say we have a key loop in our
program that we're really interested
in seeing on the system trace,
but we're not doing
any system calls in it,
so normally no events appear.
Well, let's add some.
What you can do is let's put
in a couple of signposts here.
So first off,
let's put in one which is simply
a timer for the whole loop.
So we can put in a beginning and an
interval signpost around the entire loop,
and we can see how long that
loop takes very precisely.
Also, then we can put point signposts in
at the beginning of each iteration,
so we can at a glance tell where
each loop iteration is starting,
and this will all appear on the timeline.
[Transcript missing]
and any auxiliary values
that we want to supply.
Or just a zero if you don't want one.
That's all there is to it.
Of course, in some cases,
you may not necessarily want to
link with the ChED framework.
For example,
if it doesn't exist on your system
intentionally for one reason or another,
well, you can do this without
linking to the ChED framework
by using direct syscalls here.
These are a little uglier looking,
but they do the exact same thing.
No linking with the
ChED framework necessary.
or if you're down in the KEXT, you can't,
in a KEXT of any kind,
you can't actually link with
the CHED framework down there,
so you just use the kernel debug
facility directly down there.
It's almost exactly like doing
the sys calls up in user space.
And I should point out that for this
session we have sample code associated,
which has these exact samples from the
slides and also the two that Eric had.
So you can go in and actually download
this and then use this as a starting
point to go in and put in your own
code in case of the do work functions
and start working with these directly.
Of course, there is one more little
thing we need to do.
We need to actually tell
Shark which signposts are important.
So when Shark starts,
it automatically scans the
Library Application Support Shark KDebug
Codes folder and looks for any
text files in this particular format,
which consists of these hex numbers
and the names of your signposts.
And when it reads those in, it will go,
"Okay,
these are the signposts that you're
interested in." And when you're sampling,
if it gets any signposts
with those values,
it will record them and then
present them on the screen by
name when you click on them.
If it gets any signposts
with different values,
it will assume that you're not
interested in those particular
signposts and will discard them.
So this way,
you can actually filter which signposts
are of interest if you have a lot of them
that you start adding to your program.
Okay, to kind of show you how you can
actually use this for reality,
let's go in and look at how we
did our MPEG-2 decode program and
look at it on a microscopic level.
Well, so we could see just from
what you saw in the demo,
the unordered parallel decoding
is a little bit better,
just a hair better.
And this is probably
because of load imbalance.
But, you know,
we want to verify that our intuition
here is exactly what's really
happening on the real system.
Because, of course,
as I'm sure all of you have determined,
you know, everybody's intuition is
always exactly right when it
comes to performance problems.
So, well, let's go and use
System Trace to examine this.
As it happens,
in our parallel decode program,
we actually do make several system
calls in any parallel decoding segment.
So we actually just went in and
looked around in the timeline
until we found these segments where
when we clicked on the events,
up in the call stacks,
parallel decode was in the call stack.
And we could see where we were and, oh,
yes, this is actually a parallel decoding
slice illustrated here on screen.
Now, if we didn't have all those
conveniently placed system calls,
well, this would have been a perfect spot
to go in and add signposts to say,
hey, we're beginning a parallel
decode slice here,
we're ending a parallel
and the like.
And then once we can see this, well,
we can now look back at our code
and figure out exactly what it
was doing here on the timeline.
In particular,
the baton was being handed to us.
We were told that, hey,
the file is ready for this slice to read.
Then we did a little bit
of serial file access.
Then we handed off the baton
to the next thread and said,
okay, I'm done with the file.
It's your turn.
Well, we went on and did some parallel
decoding work for the slice.
Pretty simple.
Let's look and see how
that actually works.
Well, what we can see here,
just from a quick view of this,
and I went in and picked this out
and put it up on a slide because,
unfortunately,
it does take a few minutes to
go through and find just the
right spot in the timeline,
and I figured you probably
didn't want to watch me move back
and forth for several minutes.
But feel free to come to the lab,
and I'll be happy to
demonstrate in person.
What we can see here is that, well,
you know,
the sequence timeline actually looks
almost better because it's just
smoothly passing from one thread
to the next as we do the serial
region here highlighted in orange.
The Unordered, on the other hand,
comes in and you have the
threads popping up and say,
"Hey, I want to try to--" Oh, no,
you got it first.
Oops, oh well.
So there's this fighting action,
which is making it look a little messier.
Yet the sequence is going faster.
Well, this is looking at one
spot on the timeline.
If we scroll a little further,
you can actually see that the OS X is
pulling a little operation on us and
that it's actually occasionally stealing
a processor out to do other stuff.
And so what can happen
here is that in this case,
when we go and see where the
serial regions are occurring,
well, now the unordered case looks a
lot better and a lot smoother
than the sequence case.
Because the sequence one has four
threads that are all fighting over three
processors and continually knocking
one another off of the processors.
While in the unordered case,
three threads are smoothly
using the processors,
while the fourth thread just sits
here running along and going,
"Oh, well, there's no space for me.
Okay, I'll just simply, you know,
lay back and let you guys handle the
work until I actually have some room to
get on a processor." And then that way,
no threads have to be hopping
continuously from processor to processor.
And with this, we're able to get a
small percentage better,
because while the unordered
is messier in general,
it can deal with this percentage
of time when OS X steals a
processor out from under us better.
Now, there's another thing,
if you were looking
closely at this display,
that we could also tell from
looking at the system trace.
And that is, at the four-core level,
our parallelism is really
limited by the serial code.
This is why I reduced the number
of cores down to four before.
Because what we're seeing here,
with four cores, these serial regions,
if we bring them down and
I'll put them in line,
actually form a continuous line across.
This is now the critical path.
And if we actually go
to more cores than this,
we're simply, you know,
this is going to be the bottleneck and
we're not going to get any more speed up.
In fact,
it slows down as synchronization gets
more fighting and battling going on.
Now, to give you another example,
we were given a case where we found
signal handling was a problem.
So there was a video
conferencing application we
were given a trace to look at,
and it was noted that the CPU utilization
was much higher than expected,
which caused the power consumption
to go through the roof.
So, you know, what was happening here?
Well, with our system trace here,
we could see that, well,
not to be expected,
kind of to be expected.
You had lots of threads running,
and they were running a lot.
And this is kind of unusual for a
video application where you tend
to have some decoding occurs,
and then you get to wait
until the next frame,
and then some decoding occurs,
and it waits for a little while,
and so on.
So we went in and zoomed
in and looked at this.
And what you can see is here
is we have almost entire lines,
solid lines, of failed faults occurring.
That surely wasn't
what we were expecting.
And also, when you think about this,
these are coming in at hundreds
of thousands per second.
So in each one of these is
maybe a microsecond or so.
You can do the math here,
and this is actually taking
a pretty big chunk of time,
handling these failed faults
and basically doing nothing.
This kind of puzzled us a bit.
So we went and switched
to the trace view,
which gives a complete
listing of all these events.
And it's normally not the first
place you want to go in and try
to look at your system trace.
But once you've kind of figured
out a sequence of interest,
it lets you go in and actually
examine those sequences in
detail and see all the layout.
And what we can see
here in this big table,
if we go and look at the address column,
well, all these faults are coming
into the same address.
One after another, boom, boom, boom,
boom, boom.
And what we see is that the
address column is actually
going to be the same address.
So we can see that the address column
is going to be the same address.
And what we see is that the address
column is going to be the same address.
So we can see that the address column
is going to be the same address.
And what we see is that the address
column is going to be the same address.
So what we saw here is basically all this
power consumption is happening because
something was almost always running.
You know, there's nothing, you know,
there's no idle time as a result.
And so the power chip,
processor chip could never
power down and let us,
you know,
let us cool down between frames.
And it's caused by all
these failing page faults.
And basically instead of
sleeping between frames,
our threads were getting stuck
in this cycle of sitting on these
failing page faults until another
thread or network event finally
came in and knocked them out.
And so effectively,
what should have been idle time was
spinning here in the fault handler.
And really, it wasn't necessarily the
fault of the guys who did this.
What we think happened was
that a change was made in the
OS between Tiger and Leopard,
and all of a sudden,
their signal handler,
which was catching an occasional
mistake happening now and then,
all of a sudden came to hide this big,
huge problem, which they otherwise
wouldn't have noticed.
But still,
the signal handling was causing them
a lot of grief until we came along.
and the QuickTime team came to
us and asked us to help them
with their high definition video.
So they found with 720p playback on
one of the early MacBook prototypes,
they were dropping frames left and right.
And given the processor speeds
and everything we were supporting,
this didn't make any sense.
And also the power consumption was going
through the roof and well even standard
defection was pretty power hungry,
much more so than expected.
So hey, the QuickTime guys had
been using time profiles,
going in, banging their head,
optimizing their decoder like crazy.
It wasn't helping.
Well, we pulled out System Trace
and went in and looked at it.
The problem jumped out
really fast in that,
well, all their effort on the decoder,
well,
it was actually -- they did a good job.
It was decoding and getting
out of there right away.
The problem was instead all the
rest of the time where we were
trying to take that information
from the frame and move it up on
screen so you could actually see it.
And up in the standard definition case,
it was taking like half the
screen time just to move this
video frame up to the screen.
And with the high definition case,
it was actually dropping frames because
it was taking longer than an entire frame
time just to move one frame up on screen.
And this seemed a little weird.
You'll notice how this is kind
of lightly colored on here,
too.
If you actually go in and
magnify it and zoom in on it,
well, that's all that's happening.
Little bit, little bit, little bit.
And needless to say,
that's not very efficient.
Well, so, you know, basically,
just with a couple of
quick system traces,
we were able to figure out that
decoding was not the problem.
No, instead it actually turned out to be
a GPU driver problem with a new GPU.
And instead, it was having problems.
It was just simply allocating VRAM.
And so not only was that process slow,
moreover,
it was tying up the CPU in knots because
the CPU was busy pulling it and saying,
are you done yet?
Are you done yet?
The whole time.
And those little gaps between
were so closely together,
the CPU could never actually pull it out.
So,
we just simply sat there spinning along,
burning power like crazy.
Well, you know,
once we pointed this out to them,
that really helped them a
lot with their debugging.
And moreover,
it didn't just help them their
debugging just by knowing it as fact,
but also by knowing which
thread to go and look at,
the thread that was
actually moving the data.
They could actually go back and
look at their original time profiles
and time profile all thread states.
And actually, instead of looking at the
decoder thread that they'd been
spending all their time on,
they looked instead at
those threads and went,
oh, hey, we can get a whole lot more
information out of this.
And so, we were able to get a lot more
information out of these profiles
that we didn't actually know before.
And it really helped them a lot.
So with that,
I'm going to pass the baton over
to our esteemed Rick Altherr,
who's going to talk to you about the
future of CHUD and what to expect.
Thank you, Lance.
So before we talk about
where Chud is headed,
let's take a brief look at where
Chud's history has come from,
where this all originated.
- Chud was originally created as
a collection of internal tools to
aid in the initial bring up and
performance analysis of G3 systems.
At the time,
a lot of performance improvements
revolved around making these low-level,
machine-specific optimizations
within the OS and its frameworks.
And so we wrote a collection of tools
that basically collected low-level,
machine-specific information
and aggregated it and showed
it in a variety of ways.
And this was really useful,
But over time, things have changed a bit.
We gained a couple of new architectures,
most recently the Intel architecture.
And Chud was enhanced for these
new architectures and then used
extensively within Apple to ensure
that performance on these new
platforms would be phenomenal.
We also gained support for
both Tiger and Leopard,
64-bit applications,
as well as a change to the
Dwarf debugging format.
Today, Chud's been extended
for the new platform,
the iPhone, including the arm and
thumb architectures,
as well as gained a lot of enhancement
for dealing with multi-core processors.
Looking towards the future,
we're also going to be gaining a 64-bit
kernel and a huge increase in the use
of multithreading within applications.
So once again,
Shad will adapt and gain some
support for providing performance
analysis of these new directions.
But why stop where?
We could do a little bit better.
Today I'm introducing Chud 5,
codenamed Hawaii.
Hawaii has been designed from the ground
up to support multiple architectures.
This way, that same low-level,
machine-specific detail that
we've had in Shark all along now
extends uniformly to all of the
different architectures supported
by the OS X and iPhone platforms.
Hawaii has also been written
exclusively for Snow Leopard.
We're going to use many of
the same features that you
as developers will be using,
like enhanced multi-core
support in Snow Leopard.
Hawaii also gains
support for coexistence.
Now,
this was introduced with Xcode last year,
and it basically lets you install
multiple versions of the tools
on the same OS installation.
Further, you can also relocate
Hawaii onto non-OS partitions,
like external drives,
so you can use it between
OS installations or even move the
external drive to a completely
different system and use it over there.
We're also going to consolidate
the functionality of Chud
into two applications.
We're going to use Shark for
all the profiling needs,
and we're going to use Reggie for
doing the direct hardware access.
Well, this is all great,
but we could still add a little bit more.
We're also going to fundamentally
change how we collect the
performance information.
We're going to separate the "when to
record" from the "what to record."
The when become known as triggers.
These are events that
occur in the system,
things like OS events, timers,
hardware events.
And we're going to call
the what to record,
we're going to call actions.
And these are very specific
types of information.
We want to collect specific things,
call stacks, event counts,
what process was running.
And what we want to let you do is hook
multiple actions to a single trigger.
So every time an event comes in,
you'll collect multiple types of data.
Okay, let's look at a few examples
of how this might work.
L2 cache miss profile of everything.
This exists in CHUD 4 today,
works reasonably well.
Let's look at how we
would do this in Hawaii.
We simply take a timer trigger
and attach and record L2
cache miss count action to it.
Really simple, really easy.
Let's make it a little
bit more challenging.
Let's look at a time profile of Safari,
just Safari.
Well, again,
we take a timer and we take a call
stack action and we link them up,
but we add this other
piece in the middle.
We add a conditional.
We say, only record a sample if Safari is
actually running on the processor
when the timer event occurs.
Okay, we can do this in CHUD 4 already,
so let's take it one step further.
What if you wanted to take a
system trace of just the main
thread in your application?
Again,
we simply take a system call trigger,
add two conditionals to it.
Is it my app?
Is it the main thread in my app?
And if so, and only if so,
do we actually record the call stack?
This is a bit different from
how we do things in CHUD 4.
Now, instead of recording everything
and filling up your sample
buffer very quickly and then
filtering it out at the end,
we're just not going to
record it in the first place.
So you'll get even lower overhead
when doing things like system trace.
Of course, this is all great,
but let's go one step further.
How about we do all three
of them at the same time?
Yes, we can finally do time profile
and system trace at the same time
and display the results together.
Now, Hawaii is still currently
under development,
so expect more to come out of this.
But I wanted to give you
a brief introduction.
So let's do a quick summary
of what we've learned today.
We talked mainly about a variety of ways
to actually trigger recording in Shark.
This way you can look more
specifically at what you're
interested in and also have more
accurate control over when you record.
We also talked about how you can use
Shark to look at multi-threaded programs
using time-profile thread states and
system trace to get both an overview
and a very detailed look at what's
actually happening on the system.
and we introduced Hawaii.
Please look forward to many
improvements in performance
analysis on the OS X platform.
And with that,
Please feel free to
contact Michael Jurowicz,
our evangelist, with any questions.
His email address is jurowicz@apple.com.
You can also send us feedback directly.
It's at
perftools-feedback@group.apple.com.
We like both good and bad feedback.
We'd also like to invite you to,
ask you to invite your coworkers,
people that might not
be familiar with Shark,
to our introductory session
on Thursday at 5:00.
We'll also be in a variety of labs.
We'll be in the OS X and
iPhone Performance Labs.
We'll also be kind of mulling around
in the open hours in the various labs.